README.md, before:

Ansible Role: openwrt
=========

Manage OpenWRT and derivatives with Ansible but without Python.

By putting a host in the inventory group `openwrt`, some modules are replaced with a shell version running on a standard OpenWRT installation, trying to preserve most of the original functionality. Hosts, that are not in this group are not affected. This makes it possible to have tasks mixed with OpenWRT and other platforms.
There are also some new, OpenWRT specific modules included (like `uci`).
**Not all argument combinations are tested!** Some cases have only been translated from Python for completeness' sake.

Currently, the following modules have been implemented:
 * command
 * copy
 * fetch (implicit)
 * file
 * lineinfile
 * nohup (new)
 * opkg
 * ping
 * service
 * setup
 * shell (implicit)
 * slurp
 * stat
 * sysctl
 * template (implicit)
 * uci (new)
 * wait\_for\_connection (implicit)

To achieve all this, some monkey patching is involved (in case you wonder about the `vars_plugins`).

Compatibility
-------------

This role was tested successfully with:
 * LEDE 17.01
 * OpenWRT 18.06
 * OpenWRT 19.07

Note: From OpenWRT 18.06 onward, there is a [bug in Dropbear](https://bugs.openwrt.org/index.php?do=details&task_id=1814) that can cause modules to fail if they produce too much output (> 14335 bytes). This can for example happen when changing big files and requesting a diff.

Requirements
------------

Some modules optionally require a way to generate SHA1 hashes or encode data Base64. In case of Base64, there is a very slow `hexdump | awk` implementation included. For SHA1 there is no workaround.
The modules will try to find usable system commands for SHA1 (`sha1sum`, `openssl`) and Base64 (`base64`, `openssl`, workaround) when needed. If no usable commands are found, most things will still work, but the fetch module for example has to be run with `validate_checksum: no`, will always download the file and return `changed: yes`.
Therefore it is recommended to install `coreutils-sha1sum` and `coreutils-base64`, if the commands are not already provided by busybox. The role does that automatically by default (see below).

Role Variables
--------------

    openwrt_install_recommended_packages:
        Checks for some commands and installs the corresponding packages if they are
        missing. See requirements above. (default: yes)

    openwrt_wait_for_connection, openwrt_wait_for_connection_timeout:
        Whether to wait for the host (default: yes) and how long (300) after a
        network or wifi restart (see handlers).

    openwrt_ssh, openwrt_scp, openwrt_ssh_host, openwrt_ssh_user, openwrt_user_host:
        Helper shortcuts to do things like
        "command: {{ openwrt_scp }} {{ openwrt_user_host|quote }}:/etc/rc.local /tmp"

Example Playbook
----------------

Inventory:

    [aps]
    ap1.example.com
    ap2.example.com
    ap3.example.com

    [routers]
    router1.example.com

    [openwrt:children]
    aps
    routers

    [openwrt:vars]
    ansible_remote_tmp=/tmp/ansible  # Reduce flash wear on target device

Playbook:

    - hosts: openwrt
      roles:
        - gekmihesg.openwrt
      tasks:
        - name: copy openwrt image
          command: "{{ openwrt_scp }}" image.bin {{ openwrt_user_host|quote }}:/tmp/sysupgrade.bin"
          delegate_to: localhost
        - name: start sysupgrade
          nohup:
            command: sysupgrade -q /tmp/sysupgrade.bin
        - name: wait for reboot
          wait_for_connection:
            timeout: 300
            delay: 60
        - name: install mdns
          opkg:
            name: mdns
            state: present
        - name: enable and start mdns
          service:
            name: mdns
            state: started
            enabled: yes
        - name: copy authorized keys
          copy:
            src: authorized_keys
            dest: /etc/dropbear/authorized_keys
        - name: revert pending changes
          uci:
            command: revert
        - name: configure wifi device radio0
          uci:
            command: set
            key: wireless.radio0
            value:
              phy: phy0
              type: mac80211
              hwmode: 11g
              channel: auto
        - name: configure wifi interface
          uci:
            command: section
            config: wireless
            type: wifi-iface
            find_by:
              device: radio0
              mode: ap
            value:
              ssid: MySSID
              encryption: psk2+ccmp
              key: very secret
        - name: commit changes
          uci:
            command: commit
          notify: reload wifi


Running the modules outside of a playbook is possible like this:

    export ANSIBLE_LIBRARY=~/.ansible/roles/gekmihesg.openwrt/library
    export ANSIBLE_VARS_PLUGINS=~/.ansible/roles/gekmihesg.openwrt/vars_plugins
    ansible -i openwrt-hosts -m setup all

License
-------

GNU General Public License v3.0 (see https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.txt)

Developing
----------

Writing custom modules for this framework isn't to hard. The modules are wrapped into a wrapper script, that provides some common functions for parameter parsing, json handling, response generation, and some more.
All modules must match `openwrt_<module_name>.sh`. If module\_name is not one of Ansibles core modules, there must also be a `<module_name>.py`. This does not have to have any functionality (it may have some for non OpenWRT systems) and can contain the documentation.

Commit message:

change default of scp_if_ssh and remote_tmp for OpenWRT
Fixes #18

README.md, after:

Ansible Role: openwrt
=========

Manage OpenWRT and derivatives with Ansible but without Python.

By putting a host in the inventory group `openwrt`, some modules are replaced with a shell version running on a standard OpenWRT installation, trying to preserve most of the original functionality. Hosts, that are not in this group are not affected. This makes it possible to have tasks mixed with OpenWRT and other platforms.
There are also some new, OpenWRT specific modules included (like `uci`).
**Not all argument combinations are tested!** Some cases have only been translated from Python for completeness' sake.

Currently, the following modules have been implemented:
 * command
 * copy
 * fetch (implicit)
 * file
 * lineinfile
 * nohup (new)
 * opkg
 * ping
 * service
 * setup
 * shell (implicit)
 * slurp
 * stat
 * sysctl
 * template (implicit)
 * uci (new)
 * wait\_for\_connection (implicit)

To achieve all this, some monkey patching is involved (in case you wonder about the `vars_plugins`).

Compatibility
-------------

This role was tested successfully with:
 * LEDE 17.01
 * OpenWRT 18.06
 * OpenWRT 19.07

Note: From OpenWRT 18.06 onward, there is a [bug in Dropbear](https://bugs.openwrt.org/index.php?do=details&task_id=1814) that can cause modules to fail if they produce too much output (> 14335 bytes). This can for example happen when changing big files and requesting a diff.

Requirements
------------

Some modules optionally require a way to generate SHA1 hashes or encode data Base64. In case of Base64, there is a very slow `hexdump | awk` implementation included. For SHA1 there is no workaround.
The modules will try to find usable system commands for SHA1 (`sha1sum`, `openssl`) and Base64 (`base64`, `openssl`, workaround) when needed. If no usable commands are found, most things will still work, but the fetch module for example has to be run with `validate_checksum: no`, will always download the file and return `changed: yes`.
Therefore it is recommended to install `coreutils-sha1sum` and `coreutils-base64`, if the commands are not already provided by busybox. The role does that automatically by default (see below).

Role Variables
--------------

    openwrt_install_recommended_packages:
        Checks for some commands and installs the corresponding packages if they are
        missing. See requirements above. (default: yes)

    openwrt_scp_if_ssh:
        Whether to use scp instead of sftp for OpenWRT systems. Value can be `yes`,
        `no` or `smart`. Ansible defaults to `smart` but this role defaults to `yes`
        because OpenWRT does not offer sftp by default. (default: yes)

    openwrt_remote_tmp:
        Ansibles remote_tmp setting for OpenWRT systems. Defaults to /tmp to avoid
        flash wear on target device. (default: /tmp)

    openwrt_wait_for_connection, openwrt_wait_for_connection_timeout:
        Whether to wait for the host (default: yes) and how long (300) after a
        network or wifi restart (see handlers).

    openwrt_ssh, openwrt_scp, openwrt_ssh_host, openwrt_ssh_user, openwrt_user_host:
        Helper shortcuts to do things like
        "command: {{ openwrt_scp }} {{ openwrt_user_host|quote }}:/etc/rc.local /tmp"

Example Playbook
----------------

Inventory:

    [aps]
    ap1.example.com
    ap2.example.com
    ap3.example.com

    [routers]
    router1.example.com

    [openwrt:children]
    aps
    routers

Playbook:

    - hosts: openwrt
      roles:
        - gekmihesg.openwrt
      tasks:
        - name: copy openwrt image
          command: "{{ openwrt_scp }}" image.bin {{ openwrt_user_host|quote }}:/tmp/sysupgrade.bin"
          delegate_to: localhost
        - name: start sysupgrade
          nohup:
            command: sysupgrade -q /tmp/sysupgrade.bin
        - name: wait for reboot
          wait_for_connection:
            timeout: 300
            delay: 60
        - name: install mdns
          opkg:
            name: mdns
            state: present
        - name: enable and start mdns
          service:
            name: mdns
            state: started
            enabled: yes
        - name: copy authorized keys
          copy:
            src: authorized_keys
            dest: /etc/dropbear/authorized_keys
        - name: revert pending changes
          uci:
            command: revert
        - name: configure wifi device radio0
          uci:
            command: set
            key: wireless.radio0
            value:
              phy: phy0
              type: mac80211
              hwmode: 11g
              channel: auto
        - name: configure wifi interface
          uci:
            command: section
            config: wireless
            type: wifi-iface
            find_by:
              device: radio0
              mode: ap
            value:
              ssid: MySSID
              encryption: psk2+ccmp
              key: very secret
        - name: commit changes
          uci:
            command: commit
          notify: reload wifi


Running the modules outside of a playbook is possible like this:

    export ANSIBLE_LIBRARY=~/.ansible/roles/gekmihesg.openwrt/library
    export ANSIBLE_VARS_PLUGINS=~/.ansible/roles/gekmihesg.openwrt/vars_plugins
    ansible -i openwrt-hosts -m setup all

License
-------

GNU General Public License v3.0 (see https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.txt)

Developing
----------

Writing custom modules for this framework isn't to hard. The modules are wrapped into a wrapper script, that provides some common functions for parameter parsing, json handling, response generation, and some more.
All modules must match `openwrt_<module_name>.sh`. If module\_name is not one of Ansibles core modules, there must also be a `<module_name>.py`. This does not have to have any functionality (it may have some for non OpenWRT systems) and can contain the documentation.
